DOCSP-9706: Promises and Callbacks (#88)
mongodb/docs-node: source/fundamentals/promises.txt

======================
Promises and Callbacks
======================

.. default-domain:: mongodb

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 1
   :class: singlecols

Overview
--------

> NodeJS driver uses the asynchronous Javascript API to communicate with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The NodeJS driver uses the asynchronous Javascript API to communicate with
```

your MongoDB cluster.

Asynchronous Javascript allows you to execute operations without waiting for 
the processing thread to become free. This helps prevent your application
from becoming unresponsive to web UI rendering or network requests when

> executing long-running operations. For more information about asynchronous 

Reviewer 2: This is just personal preference, but we could remove the "For more information about asynchronous Javascript, see the MDN ..." line and just link to the MDN link in the first sentence of the paragraph: 
"`Asynchronous Javascript<developer.mozzila.org/../Asynchronous/>`_ allows you to execute operations without waiting for 
the processing thread to become free"

Author: Thanks, I appreciate your thoughts on streamlining this. I intended to notify the user where the link goes, especially since it potentially draws users away from the page and our domain. The structure I'm using seems aligned with that goal:
1) Describe the term
2) Explain when it's used
3) Direct to other resources for further learning

Javascript, see the MDN web documentation on 
`Asynchronous Javascript <https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/JavaScript/Asynchronous>`_.

This section describes two features of asynchronous Javascript -- 
`Promises`_ and `Callbacks`_ -- that you can use with the NodeJS driver to
access the results of your method calls to your MongoDB cluster.

Promises
--------

A Promise is an object returned by the asynchronous method call that allows
you to access information on the eventual success or failure of the operation.

> For more information on Promises and related terminology, see the MDN

Reviewer 2: Same as the above comment on "for more information"

Feel free to ignore this comment if you disagree with it. I'm partial to included the links within the sentence because it cuts down on the bulk of the doc, and achieves the same purpose.

either the **Fulfilled** or **Rejected** state. If it reaches the **Fulfilled**
state, the reference contains the operation result as an object or value.

.. note::

   Certain methods in the driver such as ``find()`` return a ``Cursor``
   instead of a Promise. To determine what type each method returns, refer to
   the :node-api:`NodeJS API documentation <>`.

Callbacks
---------

A callback is a method that gets called after another method has
finished executing. This allows the enclosing method to continue to execute 
other commands until the original operation completes. Callbacks are often 
used to enforce the order of processing commands.

In the MongoDB NodeJS driver, you can optionally declare a callback method to
async operations that normally return Promises such as ``findOneAndModify()``,
``countDocuments()``, or ``update()``. Once the operation completes execution,
the callback method executes.

The callback method you provide should match the method signature of the 
**type** specified in the :node-api:`API documentation <>`.

 .. note::
 
    If you specify a callback, the method *does not* return a Promise.

Operational Considerations
--------------------------

> When using ``async`` methods, make sure to use ``await`` when you call methods

Reviewer 2: The phrase "make sure" makes it seem suggested but not required to use ``await``. Can you rephrase this to illustrate that ``await`` is required when using ``async`` functions

      console.log(await cursor.next());
   }

While ``hasNext()`` is not called until after the result of ``next()`` returns,
the call to ``hasNext()`` returns a Promise which evaluates to ``true`` rather
than the value it resolves to, similar to the prior example. The code
attempts to call ``next()`` on a Cursor that has already returned its results
and closed as a result.

If we alter the code to only ``await`` the call to ``hasNext()`` as shown in
the following example, the console prints Promise objects rather than the
document objects. 

.. code-block:: js

   // WARNING: this snippet prints Promises instead of the objects they resolve to
   const cursor = collection.find();

   while (await cursor.hasNext()) {
      console.log(cursor.next());
   }

Use ``await`` before both the ``hasNext()`` and ``next()`` method calls to
ensure that you are operating on the correct return values as demonstrated
in the following code:

.. code-block:: js

   const cursor = collection.find();

   while (await cursor.hasNext()) {
      console.log(await cursor.next());
   } 

.. note::

   For additional information on using Promises and Callbacks with the MongoDB
   NodeJS driver, see this

>    `MongoDB University m220js course video <https://youtu.be/R4AEyKehpss>`_.

Reviewer 2: it might be helpful to change the link text to:  see this Mongodb University M220js course video on `asynchronous programming <youtube link>`_. So that the user gets more of a preview on what they're clicking (a video about async programming) rather than the general  term "MongoDB University m220js course video"

======================
Promises and Callbacks
======================

.. default-domain:: mongodb

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 1
   :class: singlecols

Overview
--------

The NodeJS driver uses the asynchronous Javascript API to communicate with
your MongoDB cluster.

Asynchronous Javascript allows you to execute operations without waiting for
the processing thread to become free. This helps prevent your application

> from becoming unresponsive to web UI rendering or network requests when
> executing long-running operations. For more information about asynchronous

Reviewer: ```suggestion
from becoming unresponsive when
executing long-running operations. For more information about asynchronous
```

Author: I noticed I repeated nearly the same sentence, so I'm getting rid of one.

Javascript, see the MDN web documentation on
`Asynchronous Javascript <https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/JavaScript/Asynchronous>`_.

This section describes two features of asynchronous Javascript --

> `Promises`_ and `Callbacks`_ -- that you can use with the NodeJS driver to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``Promises`` and ``Callbacks`` -- that you can use with the NodeJS driver to
```

access the results of your method calls to your MongoDB cluster.

Promises
--------

A Promise is an object returned by the asynchronous method call that allows
you to access information on the eventual success or failure of the operation.

> They are often used to execute operations that take some time and have
> when you want to notify once it's completed. For more information on Promises

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They are used to execute operations upon the completion of other operations that take
an indeterminate time and have. For more information on Promises
```

Author: I think this could be misleading to the reader because:
-It's not a requirement for the operation to take an indeterminate time to use Promises
-It's not a requirement to use Promises for operations that take an indeterminate time to run
-I think there's a sentence fragment here: "and have".
-There's no mention about notification once it's completed which is a key feature of what it replaces/wraps (callbacks)

and related terminology, see the MDN documentation on
:mdn:`Promises <Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Promise>`.

If you call a driver method such as ``findOneAndModify()``,
``countDocuments()``, or ``update()``, the NodeJS driver returns a Promise.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Await
~~~~

```

Reviewer: I think the entire await section should be after talking about `.then()` and `.catch()`, personally. With the current split it feels like we're mixing topics. Thoughts?

Author: Sure, makes sense to me.

You can use the ``await`` operator inside of an ``async`` method on the
Promise to cause the enclosing method to pause until the Promise reaches
either the **Fulfilled** or **Rejected** state. If it reaches the **Fulfilled**
state, the reference contains the operation result as an object or value.

.. code-block:: js

   async function run() {
     ...
     const result = await collection.insertOne({ name: "Mount Everest", meters: 8848 });

     // print the result of the insertOne() call
     console.log(result);
   }

If you want to execute logic once the Promise reaches the **Fulfilled**
or **Rejected** state, you can append the ``then()`` method to the Promise.
The first parameter is the method that gets called when the Promise reaches
the **Fulfilled** state and the optional second parameter is the method that
gets called when it reaches the **Rejected** state. These methods are called
**callbacks** because they execute only after the Promise completes.

.. code-block:: js

   ...

>    collection.updateOne({ name: "Mount McKinley" }, { meters: 6190 })

Reviewer: Updates require an update operator

     .then(
       res => console.log(`Updated ${res.result.n} documents`),

>        err => console.error(`Something went wrong: ${err}`)

Reviewer: ? I believe if the operation errors it will end up being an unhandled promise rejection in this example because there is no `.catch()` chain. Am I mistaken?

https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Promise#Chained_Promises

Author: This example is demonstrating using both at the same time. The examples you linked omit the catch in each of the `then()` methods, and then catch them at the end which is a different use case. I can show that too, if it's necessary.

     );

If you only need to handle transitions to the **Rejected** state, use the
``catch()`` method which accepts a single callback, executed when the Promise
transitions to the **Rejected** state.

.. code-block:: js

     const deleteResult = await collection.deleteOne({ name: "Mount Doom" })
       .catch(err => console.error(`Fatal error occurred: ${err}`));

.. note::

   Certain methods in the driver such as ``find()`` return a ``Cursor``
   instead of a Promise. To determine what type each method returns, refer to
   the :node-api:`NodeJS API documentation <>`.

Callbacks
---------

A callback is a method that gets called after another method has
finished executing. This allows the enclosing method to continue to execute
other commands until the original operation completes. Callbacks are often
used to enforce the order of processing commands.

In the MongoDB NodeJS driver, you can optionally declare a callback method to
async operations that normally return Promises such as ``findOneAndUpdate()``,
``countDocuments()``, or ``update()``. Once the operation completes execution,
the callback method executes as shown in the following code snippet:

.. code-block:: js

>    collection.findOneAndUpdate({ name: "Barronette Peak" }, { name: "Baronette Peak" },

Reviewer: An update operator is required here.

Author: Oops, you mean options object right? https://mongodb.github.io/node-mongodb-native/3.5/api/Collection.html#findOneAndUpdate

Author: Never mind! Need both

     function(error, result) {
       if (!error) {
         console.log(`Operation completed successfully: ${result.ok}`);
       } else {
         console.log(`An error occurred: ${error}`);
       }
    });

For more information on the callback method signature for the specific
driver method, see the :node-api:`API documentation <>`.

 .. note::

    If you specify a callback, the method *does not* return a Promise.

Operational Considerations
--------------------------

When using ``async`` methods, use ``await`` when you call methods
that return Promises to ensure they complete before executing any other
logic that depends on the result. Consider the following example in which
we iterate over a cursor using ``hasNext()``, which returns a Promise that
resolves to a boolean that indicates whether additional results exist, and
``next()`` which returns a Promise that resolves to the next entry the
cursor is pointing to.

One common mistake is to forget to use ``await`` to get the value of the

> result rather than the Promise object. Consider the following code:

Reviewer: This feels like a rehash of what is being said in the above paragraph and interrupt the flow of this section to me

.. code-block:: js

   // WARNING: this snippet may cause an infinite loop
   const cursor = collection.find();

   while (cursor.hasNext()) {
      console.log(cursor.next());
   }

Since the call to ``hasNext()`` returns a ``Promise``, the conditional

> statement returns ``true`` regardless of the value that it resolves to.

Reviewer: Awesome

======================
Promises and Callbacks
======================

.. default-domain:: mongodb

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 1
   :class: singlecols

Overview
--------

> The NodeJS driver uses the asynchronous Javascript API to communicate with

Reviewer 3: Why do we refer to it as `NodeJS` when the official Node site refers to it as `Node.js`?

Not having the correct naming is like saying `Javascript` instead of `JavaScript`. Unless there is a specific reason, I think we lose credibility with developers.

Author: I think this was a team decision made some time ago. Perhaps @terakilobyte or @mbroadst can weigh in on how we want to represent it and then we can change it across all the driver documentation.

Reviewer 4: :wave: It should be `Node.js`

Author: Sounds good, created a ticket to do this across all the guidance docs:
https://jira.mongodb.org/browse/DOCSP-10080

``then()`` methods.

When you append one or more ``then()`` methods to a Promise, each call passes
its execution result to the next one. This pattern is called
**Promise chaining**. The following code snippet shows an example of Promise
chaining by appending a single ``then()`` method.

.. code-block:: js

   collection
     .updateOne({ name: "Mount McKinley" }, { $set: { meters: 6190 } })
     .then(
       res => console.log(`Updated ${res.result.n} documents`),
       err => console.error(`Something went wrong: ${err}`),
     );

If you only need to handle Promise transitions to the **Rejected** state,
rather than passing a ``null`` first parameter to ``then()``, you can instead
use the ``catch()`` method which accepts a single callback, executed when the
Promise transitions to the **Rejected** state.

The ``catch()`` method is often appended at the end of a Promise chain to
handle any exceptions thrown. The following code snippet demonstrates appending
a ``catch()`` method to the end of a Promise chain.

.. code-block:: js

   deleteOne({ name: "Mount Doom" })
     .then(result => {
       if (result.deletedCount !== 1) {
         throw "Could not find Mount Doom!";
       }

>        return incinerateNazgul();

Reviewer 3: Does `incinerateNazgul()` return a promise? Is this function part of the driver?

I realize this is just an example, but to the new user or developer, this may be confusing. It is worth elaborating what this function is or return the following instead:

```
return new Promise((resolve, reject) => {
    // ...
});
```

Author: Would it be clear enough if I renamed the method `incinerateNazgulPromise()` or something to that effect? I wanted to focus this example on chaining Promises rather than show how to declare a Promise.

Reviewer 3: I think that is probably fine. Or add a comment above it that says it is a function that returns a promise.
